# Exercises to Chapter 1.1: _1-14_

Legend:

* $A \cup B = \{ x | x \in A \land x \in B \}$ - union of two sets.
* $A \cap B = \{ x | x \in A \lor x \in B \}$ - intersection of two sets.
* $A \setminus B = \{ x | x \in A \land x \notin B \}$ - set difference.
* $A \triangle B = (A \cup B) \setminus (A \cap B)$ - symmetrical set difference.
* $A \subset B$ - A is a subset of B
* $A = B \implies A \subset B \land B \subset A$

## 1

* Chessmaster set: $C$
* Mathematician set: $M$

Age function: $A_c(c | c \in C) \rightarrow N, A_m(m | m \in M) \rightarrow N$

* $J = C \cup M$
* $max(A_c) \rightarrow N \implies$ same person

## 2

Solution:

$Best_M$, $Best_C$ functions are different $\implies$ different persons.

## 3

* $|M|/10 = |C \cap M|$
* $|C|/6 = |M \cap C| \implies$
* $\frac {|M|} {10} = \frac {|C|} 6 \implies {|C|} = \frac 5 3 {|M|}$

## 4

Task: prove existence of sets $A, B, C$ so that

$A \cap B \neq \emptyset, A \cap C = \emptyset, (A \cap B) \setminus C = \emptyset$

---

$A \cap B$ is not empty, also $(A \cap B) \in A$, also A and C do not have common elements due to $A \cap C = \emptyset \implies (A \cap B) \setminus C \neq \emptyset \blacksquare$

## 5, 6

`(а)` $(A \cap B) \cup C = (A \cup C) \cap (B \cup C)$ -- $true$

---

1. Suppose $x \in (A \cap B) \cup C \implies x \notin C \land x \in A \land x \in B$.
1. $x \in A \implies x \in (A \cup C)$
1. $x \in B \implies x \in (B \cup C)$
1. Both of the above imply that x belongs to the right hand side.
1. Similar proof for a situation when x belongs to the right hand side expression. $\blacksquare$

`(б)` $(A \cup B) \cap C = (A \cap C) \cup (B \cap C)$ -- $true$

---

1. Suppose $x \in (A \cup B) \cap C \implies x \in C \land x \in (A \cup B) \implies (x \in A \lor x \in B)$.
2. $(x \in A \lor x \in B) \land (x \in C) \implies (x \in (A \cap C)) \lor (x \in (B \cap C))$
3. Similar proof for a situation when x belongs to the right hand side expression. $\blacksquare$

`(в)` $(A \cup B) \setminus C = (A \setminus C) \cup B$ -- $false$

---

counterexample: $A = (1), B = (2), C = (1, 2)$:
* $(A \cup B) \setminus C = \emptyset$
* $(A \setminus C) \cup B = (2)$

`(г)` $(A \cap B) \setminus C = (A \setminus C) \cap B$ -- $true$

---

1. Suppose $x \in (A \cap B) \setminus C \implies x \notin C \land x \in (A \cap B) \implies x \in A \land x \in B$
1. $x \notin C \land x \in A \implies x \in (A \setminus C)$
1. $x \in (A \setminus C) \land x \in B \implies x \in (A \setminus C) \cap B$
1. Similar proof for a situation when x belongs to the right hand side expression. $\blacksquare$

`(д)` $A \setminus (B \cup C) = (A \setminus B) \cap (A \setminus C)$ -- $true$

---

1. Suppose $x \in A \setminus (B \cup C) \implies x \in A \land x \notin (B \cup C) \implies x \notin B \land x \notin C$
1. $x \in A \land x \notin B \implies x \in (A \setminus B)$
1. $x \in A \land x \notin C \implies x \in (A \setminus C)$
1. Both of the above imply that x belongs to right hand side expression.
1. Similar proof for a situation when x belongs to the right hand side expression. $\blacksquare$

`(е)` $A \setminus (B \cap C) = (A \setminus B) \cup (A \setminus C)$ -- $true$

---

1. Suppose $x \in A \setminus (B \cap C) \implies x \in A \land x \notin (B \cap C) \implies (x \notin B) \lor (x \notin C)$
1. $x \in A \land (x \notin B) \lor (x \notin C) \implies x \in (A \setminus B) \lor x \in (A \setminus C)$
1. Above implies that x belongs to right hand side expression.
1. Similar proof for a situation when x belongs to the right hand side expression. $\blacksquare$

## 7

Prove associativity of symmetrical set difference: $(A \triangle B) \triangle C = A \triangle (B \triangle C)$

---

1. Suppose $x \in (A \triangle B) \triangle C \implies$ either of the following:
   1. $x \in C \land x \notin (A \triangle B) \implies x \in C \land ((x \notin A \land x \notin B) \lor (x \in A \cap B)) \implies (x \in C \land x \notin A \land x \notin B) \lor x \in A \cap B \cap C$
   2. Or: $x \notin C \land x \in (A \triangle B) \implies (x \notin C \land x \in A \land x \notin B) \lor (x \notin C \land x \notin A \land x \in B)$
2. Combining 1.1 and 1.2 the ultimate formula for x: $(x \in A \land x \notin B \land x \notin C) \lor (x \notin A \land x \in B \land x \notin C) \lor (x \notin A \land x \notin B \land x \in C) \lor x \in A \cap B \cap C$
3. Similar logical formula for assumption when x belongs to right hand side expression. $\blacksquare$

## 8

Prove, that $(A_1 \cap ... \cap A_n) \triangle (B_1 \cap ... \cap B_n) \subset (A_1 \triangle B_1) \cup ... \cup (A_n \triangle B_n)$

---

Lemmas:

1. $A \subset A' \land B \subset B' \implies A \cup B \subset A' \cup B'$
2. For each sets $X, Y, Z: X \subset Y \implies X \cup Z \subset Y \cup Z$

Proof by induction.

1. Induction base: the proof is self evident for $n=1$.
   1. For $n = 2$ let's prove $(A_1\cap A_2) \triangle (B_1 \cap B_2) \subset (A_1 \triangle B_1) \cup (A_2 \triangle B_2)$
   2. Left hand side expression could be rewritten as $(A_1\cap A_2) \triangle (B_1 \cap B_2) = \{x | (x \in (A_1\cap A_2) \land x \notin (B_1 \cap B_2)) \lor (x \notin (A_1\cap A_2) \land x \in (B_1 \cap B_2)) \} = \{ x | (x \in A_1 \land x \in A_2 \land x \notin (B_1 \cup B_2)) \cup (x \in B_1 \land x \in B_2 \land x \notin (A_1 \cup A_2)) \} = \{ x | (x \in A_1 \land x \in A_2 \land x \notin B_1) \lor (x \in A_1 \land x \in A_2 \land x \notin B_2) \lor (x \in B_1 \land x \in B_2 \land x \notin A_1) \lor (x \in B_1 \land x \in B_2 \land x \notin A_2) \}$
   3. Right hand side expression could be rewritten as $(A_1 \triangle B_1) \cup (A_2 \triangle B_2) = \{ x | (x \in A_1 \land x \notin B_1) \lor (x \notin A_1 \land x \in B_1) \lor (x \in A_2 \land x \notin B_2) \lor (x \notin A_2 \land x \in B_2) \}$
   4. Note, that rewritten left hand expression contains a disjunction of sets each of which is a subset of the exactly one corresponding set in the rewritten right hand side expression. For example: $\{ x | x \in A_1 \land x \in A_2 \land x \notin B_1 \} \subset \{ x \in A_1 \land x \notin B_1 \}$ therefore a whole disjunction expression that comprises left hand side of the original statement is a subset or the right hand side. $\square$
2. Induction step: assume $(A_1 \cap ... \cap A_{n-1}) \triangle (B_1 \cap ... \cap B_{n-1}) \subset (A_1 \triangle B_1) \cup ... \cup (A_{n-1} \triangle B_{n-1})$
3. Per assumption (2) below it should suffice to prove that $(A_1 \cap ... \cap A_n) \triangle (B_1 \cap ... \cap B_n) \subset ((A_1 \cap ... \cap A_{n-1}) \triangle (B_1 \cap ... \cap B_{n-1})) \cup (A_n \triangle B_n)$.
4. Let $A' = (A_1 \cap ... \cap A_{n-1}), B' = (B_1 \cap ... \cap B_n)$, then (3) could be rewritten as an assertion $(A' \cap A_{n}) \triangle (B' \cap B_{n}) \subset (A' \triangle B') \cup (A_n \triangle B_n)$ which is equivalent to induction base for $n = 2$. $\blacksquare$

## 9

Prove, that if any equality expression comprised of set variables $A_1, ..., A_n$ and operations $\cup, \cap, \setminus$ is incorrect then such counterexample could be always found so that each set $A_i$ would be either empty or contain exactly one element.

---

The proof is obvious for expression comprised of single set variables, e.g. $A_1 = A_2$.

For anything involving more complicated expressions including at least one use of any given operation assume we have an equality expression

$$S_L(A_1,..., A_n) = S_R(A_1, ..., A_n)$$

comprised of set variables $A_i$ and operations $\cup, \cap, \setminus$ which has counterexample $(A_1,..., A_n) = (C_1,...,C_n)$.

The above implies that either $S_L(C_1,...,C_n)$ or $S_R(C_1,...,C_n)$ would not be empty (if both are empty then set expressions are equal for given $A_i = C_i$ so we wouldn't have a counterexample to begin with). Without loss of generality, let's assume that at least $S_L(C_1,...,C_n)$ is not be empty. In this case:

$$\exists x : x \in S_L(C_1,...,C_n) \land x \notin S_R(C_1,...,C_n)$$

Given assumption above, $S_L(C_1,..., C_n) = S'_L(C_1,..., C_n) \circ S''_L(C_1,..., C_n)$ where $\circ$ is one of $\cup, \cap, \setminus$.

Let's review all possibilities for $\circ$ operation:

1. It is a union. In this case $x \in S'_L(C_1,..., C_n) \lor x \in S''_L(C_1,..., C_n)$.
2. It is an intersection. In this case $x \in S'_L(C_1,..., C_n) \land x \in S''_L(C_1,..., C_n)$.
3. It is a difference. In this case $x \in S'_L(C_1,..., C_n) \land x \notin S''_L(C_1,..., C_n)$.

In all of those cases $x$ would belong to an expression containing fewer operations than original expression $S_1$ for which a counterexample could be build by induction. $\blacksquare$

## 10

How many different set expressions could be constructed using set variables $A$ and $B$ using union, intersection and difference operations?
Two expressions are considered to be the same if they are equal to each other for all possible values of set variables.
Same question for 3 and $n$ sets.

---

Assume a function that givess a value we're looking is denoted as $C(n)$ where $n$ is a number of set variables and let's also denote a function that gives a maximum number of disjoint sets for given set variables and given operations as $D(n)$.

Note, that $C(n) = 2^{D(n)}$ - since $D(n)$ gives a number of disjoint sets, given operations can yield any combination of these sets starting with an empty set and ending with a union of all disjoint sets. So, proving that $D(n) = 2^n - 1$ proves that $C(n) = 2^{2^n - 1}$.

Let's prove that $D(n) = 2^n - 1$.

Assume we have two set variables: $A$ and $B$. For all possible values of these variables we can get *at most* three disjoint sets (best illustrated using Venn diagram): $S_1, S_2, S_3$ [10-1]. This proves base of induction for $D(2)$.

Induction step: if we had $k$ disjoint sets for $n$ then adding another set adds $k + 1$ new sets - a new set variable could introduce a set that intersects all of the disjoint sets for $n$ set variables plus add one more separate disjoint set (best illustrated by Venn diagram). So $D(n+1) = D(n) + D(n) + 1 = 2 \cdot D(n) + 1 = 2^{n + 1} - 1$. $\blacksquare$

---

Notes:

[10-1] Therefore all possible values for given set operations are as follows (remember: $\forall i \neq j: S_i \cap S_j = \emptyset$):

1. $\emptyset$
2. $S_1$
3. $S_2$
4. $S_3$
5. $S_1 \cup S_2$
6. $S_1 \cup S_3$
7. $S_2 \cup S_3$
8. $S_1 \cup S_2 \cup S_3$

Or a total of 8 elements. This proves the base of induction: $C(2) = 8 = 2^3 = 2^{2^2 - 1}$. Showing this is not necessary as long as we track the number of elements via expression containing $D(n)$.

## Links

* [Guide to Set Theory Proofs](https://web.stanford.edu/class/archive/cs/cs103/cs103.1198/handouts/070%20Guide%20to%20Set%20Theory%20Proofs.pdf)
* [How to do a Proof in Set Theory](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JF40Cq-iiP0)
* [Methods of Proofs for Sets](https://math.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Combinatorics_and_Discrete_Mathematics/Applied_Discrete_Structures_(Doerr_and_Levasseur)/04%3A_More_on_Sets/4.01%3A_Methods_of_Proof_for_Sets)
