# Chapter 1.2: Count of Elements

## Introduction

Theorem 1 (**Principle of Inclusion and Exclusion** formula):

$$|A \cup B| = |A| + |B| - |A \cap B|$$

or, more generally:

$$|A_1 \cup ... \cup A_n| = \sum_{i}^{} |A_i| - \sum_{i<j}^{} |A_i \cap A_j| + \sum_{i<j<k}^{} |A_i \cap A_j \cap A_k| - ...$$

---

**Characteristic function**:

$$\chi_{X} : \forall X \subset U \implies (e \in X \implies \chi_{X}(e) = 1) \land (e \in (U \setminus X) \implies \chi_{X}(e) = 0)$$

---

**One-to-one correspondence**:

Two sets $A$ and $B$ are said to be equivalent if there is some [bijection](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bijection) from $A$ onto $B$.

---

## 15

Prove:

$$|A_1 \triangle ... \triangle A_n| = \sum_{i}^{} |A_i| - 2^{1}\sum_{i<j}^{} |A_i \cap A_j| + 2^{2}\sum_{i<j<k}^{} |A_i \cap A_j \cap A_k| - ...$$

---

Assume $U : \forall A_i \in U, i \in \{1..n\}$.

Original formula could then be rewritten as follows using characteristic functions [15-1]:

$$\chi_{A_1 \triangle ... \triangle A_n} = \sum_{i}^{} \chi_{A_i} - 2^{1}\sum_{i<j}^{} \chi_{A_i} \chi_{A_j} + 2^{2}\sum_{i<j<k}^{} \chi_{A_i} \chi_{A_j} \chi_{A_k} - ...$$

Proof by induction:

* Induction base: $\chi_{A_1 \triangle A_2} = \chi_{(A \cup B) \setminus (A \cap B)} = \chi_{A \cup B} - \chi_{A \cap B} = (\chi_{A_1} + \chi_{A_2} - \chi_{A_1} \chi_{A_2}) - (\chi_{A_1} \chi_{A_2}) = \chi_{A_1} + \chi_{A_2} - 2\chi_{A_1} \chi_{A_2}$.
* Induction step: assume formula is true for $n-1$, in this case using associativity property of symmetric difference the original formula could be rewritten as $\chi_{(A_1 \triangle ... \triangle A_{n-1}) \triangle A_n}$. Assume $B = A_1 \triangle ... \triangle A_{n-1}$: $\chi_{B \triangle A_n} = \chi_{B} + \chi_{A_n} - 2\chi_{B} \chi_{A_n} = \chi_{A_n} + (\sum_{i}^{} \chi_{A_i} - 2^{1}\sum_{i<j}^{} \chi_{A_i} \chi_{A_j} + 2^{2}\sum_{i<j<k}^{} \chi_{A_i} \chi_{A_j} \chi_{A_k} - ...) - 2 \chi_{A_n}(\sum_{i}^{} \chi_{A_i} - 2^{1}\sum_{i<j}^{} \chi_{A_i} \chi_{A_j} + 2^{2}\sum_{i<j<k}^{} \chi_{A_i} \chi_{A_j} \chi_{A_k} - ...)$ which yields formula [15-1] which in its turn yields original formula. $\blacksquare$

---

Note: considering that $A_1$'s part of a symmetric difference is a union of itself and the inverse of $A_2$ (or $1-\chi_{A_2}$) it is also possible to show the above via a formula

$$\chi_{A_1 \triangle A_2} = \chi_{A_1}(1-\chi_{A_2}) + \chi_{A_2}(1-\chi_{A_1})$$
## 16

A 1000 white dots and one black dot randomly picked up on the circle.
What is a bigger set - a set comprised of triangles so that each triangle has all vertices colored white or a set of rectangles so that each rectangle has 3 white and one black vertex?

---

Those are sets of equal size b/c a each rectangle has exactly one triangle where all vertices are white and vice versa.

## 17

What has the largest cardinality - a set comprised of 43-elements subset of a 100-set or a similar set comprised of 57 elements?

---

A number of unique $k$-sets each comprised of elements of an $n$-set is

$$C_{n}^{k} = \frac{n!}{k!(n-k)!}$$

which yields $C_{100}^{43} = \frac{100!}{43!57!}$ for a set comprised of 43 elements, same number for a set comprised of 57 elements.

## 18

Prove, that a number of sequences of cardinality $n$ comprised of $0, 1$ is the same as a number of subsets of a set $\{ 1, 2, ..., n \}$.

---

Assume a certain sequence $S_{n}$ of length $n$ comprised of $0, 1$:

$$S_{n} = e_1, ..., e_n, \forall i \in \{ 1, ..., n \} : e_i \in \{ 0, 1 \}$$

In this case a bijection between a set comprised of $S_{n}$ and a set of subsets of a set $A = \{ 1, 2, ..., n \}$ could be built as follows:

1. $\forall Q \subset A$ there would be one and only one $S_{n}$ that could be picked up so that $e_i \in S_{n}$ would be $1$ if and only if $i \in Q$ and $0$ otherwise.
2. Conversely for a certain sequence $S_{n}$ there would be one and only one subset $Q : Q \subset A$, so that $\forall e_i \in S_{n} \implies (e_i = 1 \land i \in Q) \lor (e_i = 0 \land i \notin Q)$.

Hence we have a bijection which yields the objective. $\blacksquare$

---

Note: missing formal definition of a sequence.

Could be something like that? - A sequence $S_n$ comprised of $n$ elements $a_1, ..., a_n$ is equivalent to a set $T$ and two functions $P, V$, so that:

1. $|T|=n$
1. $\forall i \in \{ 1, ..., n \} : \exist t \in T \land P(t) = i \land V(t) = a_i$

## 19

Prove, that a number of sequences of cardinality $n$ comprised of $0, 1$ so that each sequence has exactly $k$ ones equal to a number of $k$-element subsets of an $n$-set.

Going forward a number of combinations from $n$ by $k$ is designated as either $C_{n}^{k}$ or $n \choose k$.

---

Assume $n$-set is $A_n$ and a sequence of cardinality $n$ comprised of $0, 1$ is $S_n^{k}$:

$$\sum_{e \in S_n}{e} = n$$

1. $\forall Q_k \subset A_n : |Q_k| = k$ there would be one and only one $S_{n}$ that could be picked up so that $e_i \in S_{n}^{k}$ would be $1$ if and only if $i \in Q_{k}$ and $0$ otherwise.
2. Conversely for a certain sequence $S_{n}^{k}$ there would be one and only one subset $Q_k : Q_k \subset A_n \land |Q_k| = k$, so that $\forall e_i \in S_{n}^{k} \implies (e_i = 1 \land i \in Q_k) \lor (e_i = 0 \land i \notin Q_k)$.

Hence we have a bijection which yields the objective. $\blacksquare$

## 20

Prove $C_{n}^{k} = C_{n}^{n - k}$.

---

As per (19) problem it is possible to build a bijection between a set comprised of $k$-element subsets of an $n$-set and $M$ - a set of sequences $S_{n}^{k}$.
On the other hand the same bijection could be build for $S_{n}^{n-k}$ by inverting relation condition between $S_{n}^{n-k}$ and elements of $M$ so that $0$ would correspond to the presence of element instead of $1$. Hence we have a bijection which yields the objective. $\blacksquare$

## 21

Prove:

$$\sum_{k=0}^{n}C_{n}^{k} = 2^n$$

---

Original relation is equivalent to the number of a subsets in an $n$-set which according to (12) is $2^n$. $\blacksquare$

## 22

Assume $U : U \neq \emptyset \land |U|=n \land n \in N$. Prove, that count of $U$ subsets that have even cardinality is the same as count of $U$ subsets that have odd cardinality.

---

Assume $u, Q, P : u \in U \land u \notin P \land P \subset U \land Q = P \cup \{ u \} \implies$ $|Q|$ and $|P|$ would have different parity since their cardinality differs by $1$.

Note the existence of bijection between a set of all possible $Q$ and $P$ and a certain $u \in U$:

* $\forall Q \subset U \implies \exist P : P \subset U \land Q = P \cup \{ u \}$
* it is easy to see that converse is also true.

Hence a cardinality of a set comprised of all possible $Q$ would be equal to cardinality of a set comprised of all possible $P$ and since their cardinality differs by one it yields the desired proof. $\blacksquare$

## 23

Prove:

$$\sum_{k=0}^{n}(-1)^{k}C_{n}^{k} = 0$$

---

Proof follows from (22) as it sums cardinalities of all odd subsets of a certain $n$-set minus cardinalities of all even subsets of the same set.

## 24

Prove:

$$(a+b)^n = \sum_{k=0}^{n} C_{n}^{k} a^{k} b^{n-k}$$

---

Note $(a+b)^n = (a+b)...$ $n$ times $...(a+b)$. Let's number multiplication factors, so that we have multiplicands $(a+b)$ ranging from the first up to the $n$. Also note that multiplication sum would contain addends where each addend would contain either $a$ or $b$ taken from the first multiplicand $(a+b)$ then $a$ or $b$ taken from the second one and so forth. Which means that number of multiplicands with $k$ number of $a$ (and conversely $(n-k)$ number of $b$) would be equal to a number $k$-element sets out of $n$-element - where $n$-element set would be a set of all ordered multiplicands $(a+b)$ introduced above and $k$-element set would include $k$ elements of $a$ and $(n-k)$ elements of $b$. A total number of $k$-subsets of $n$-set is $C_{n}^{k}$ therefore summing all those multiplicands for addends containing $k$ elements of $a$ (and conversely $n-k$ elements of $b$) would yield $C_{n}^{k} a^{k} b^{n-k}$.

Therefore by definition given in (19) we have the desired formula.

## 25

Prove, that number of all possible combinations of putting braces in non-associative multiplication of $n$ elements is the same as number of ways to divide a convex $(n+1)$-gon to triangles by non-intersecting diagonals.

E.g. for three elements $a, b, c$ there are two ways: $(ab)c, a(bc)$ and there are two ways of dividing a convex rectangle to two triangles by adding either diagnoals (never both as they by definition can't intersect).

---

Definitions:

1. Assume $f(n)$ is a function, returning a number of combination of putting braces in non-associative multiplication of $n$ elements.
2. Assume $g(n)$ is a function, returning a number of ways to divide a convex $(n+1)$-gon to triangles by non-intersecting diagonals.

Proving $\forall n \in N, n > 2 : g(n) = f(n)$ is equivalent to proving the original assertion.

Proof by induction. Induction base: existence of bijection is evident for $n=3: g(3) = f(3) = 2$.

Induction step: adding a new element extends bijection definition by the same amount for number of braces and number of combinations:

1. Assume that new element is added to a multiplication of $n-1$ elements, in this case $f(n)$ would be comprised of the following parts:
   1. $f(n-1)$ - a number of elements computed for $n-1$ assuming that last element is not involved in any subexpresson containing braces.
   2. ...
2. ...
