# 1.4. Countable Sets

Theorem 2:

(a) Any subset of a countable set is either countable or finite.
(b) All infinite set contains a countable set.
(c) Union of a finite or countable number of finite or countable set is either countable or finite.

## 29 - Polynomial Bijection for $N \times N \rightarrow N$

Find a second degree polynomial $f(x, y) \rightarrow z; x,y,z \in N$ acting as a bijection between $N \times N \rightarrow N$.

---

"Guessed" sample mapping:

```text
      1   2   3   4   5 <b
a>1   1   3   6   10  15
  2   2   5   9   14  20
  3   4   8   13  19  26
  4   7   12  18  25  ...   
  5   11  17  24  ...
```

f(1, 1) = 1
f(1, b) = f(1, b - 1) + b = b(b+1)/2
f(a, 1) = f(a - 1, 1) + (a - 1) = (a-1)a / 2 + (a-b + 1)(a-b+2)/2

* 1st element: b*(b+1)/2 (first row)
* next elements:
  * (b-1)*(a-1) - arithmetic progression base diff
  * (a-1)*a/2 - base

Answer:


```text
f(a, b) = b*(b+1)/2 + (b-1)*(a-1) + (a-1)*a/2
```

Simplification:

```text
2c = b^2 + b + 2ab - 2a - 2b + 2 + a^2 - a = (a+b)^2 + 2 - 3a - b
c = ((a+b)^2 + 2 - 3*a - b)/2
```

$$f(x, y) = \frac{y(y+1)}{2} + (x-1)(y-1) + \frac{x(x-1)}{2} = \frac{(x+y)^2 - 3x - y}{2} + 1$$

## 30

* A set of rational numbers $Q$ is countable
* A set $N^k$ containing elements which are sets of $k$ natural numbers is countable.
* Cartesian product of $n : n \in N$ countable sets is countable too.

## 31

Prove that any set of non-intersecting intervals on a line is either finite or countable.

---

Proof of existence of bijection between a given set of intervals and countable set: any interval $(a, b) : a < b \land a, b \in R$ would contain a rational number, therefore each interval could be mapped to a certain rational number and a set of all rational numbers is countable. Thus a given set is either countable too or finite. $\blacksquare$

## 32

(a) Prove that any set of non-intersecting "eights" (a union of two non-intersecting circles with one common point) is countable.

(b) Same assertion as in (a) for letters "T"

---

Proof for (a): any non-empty circle on Cartesian plane would contain a point with rational $x, y$ coordinates. Therefore for each "eight"-element there would be a unique element in $Q^4$ which is a countable set thus any set of "eights" is either finite or countable. $\blacksquare$

Proof for (b):

> TODO

## 33

Prove that a set of dots constituting a strict local maximum of any function of real argument is either finite or countable.

---

A proof boils down to showing that there is a non-empty neighbourhood of local maximums from which follows that we can find a point with rational coordinates from which follows that a set of such points is either finite or equinumerous to $Q^2$ which is countable.

## 34

Prove that a set of breaking point of non-decreasing function of a real argument is either finite or countable.

---

A proof boils down to showing that there is a non-empty neighbourhood of breaking point from which follows that we can find a point with rational coordinates from which follows that a set of such points is either finite or equinumerous to $Q^2$ which is countable.

## Theorem 3

If $A$ is an infinite set and $B$ is either finite or countable, then $A \cup B$ is equinumerous to $A$.

---

$\triangleleft$

Assume $B \cup A = \emptyset$ - if it is not, then intersection could be thjrown away from $B$ while still ending up with a finite or a countable set.

Assume $A = P + Q$ where $P \cup Q = \emptyset$ and $P$ is countable.
With this it is sufficient to prove that $B + P + Q$ is equinumerous to $P + Q$, here a "plus" sign means a union of non-intersecting sets. Since $B + P$ and $P$ are both countable, they are also equinumerous. Thus it is easy to see that $B + P + Q$ is equinumerous to $P + Q$ since every element of $Q$ would correspond to itself.

$\triangleright$

## 35

Build a bijection between an interval (range) $[0, 1]$ and half-interval $[0, 1)$.

---

Let's rewrite $M_1=[0, 1]$ as $M_1=C_1 \cup R_1 : R_1 = \{ \frac{1}{n} | n \in \N^+ \} \land C_1 = M_1 \setminus R_1$ and $M_2=[0, 1)$ as $M_2=C_2 \cup R_2 : R_2 = \{ \frac{1}{n+1} | n \in \N^+ \} \land C_1 = M_1 \setminus R_1$ and $M_2=[0, 1)$.

It is easy to see that $C_1 = C_2$. Also both $R_1, R_2$ are countable sets.

So a bijection would be a one-to-one mapping for elements of $C_1, C_2$ and for elements of $R_1, R_2$ it would be as follows:

$$g : R_1 \rightarrow R_2, g(\frac{1}{n}) = \frac{1}{n+1}, n \in \N^+$$

and

$$g^{-1} : R_2 \rightarrow R_1, g^{-1}(\frac{1}{n}) = \frac{1}{n-1}, n \in (\N^+ \setminus \{1\})$$

## 36

(a) Could removing a countable set $B$ from another infinite set $A$ change cardinality of $A$? 

(b) Prove that if $A$ is an uncountable set and $B$ is either finite or countable, then $A \setminus B$ is equinumerous to $A$.

---

(a) Yes, for example: $A=\N \land B=\N^+ \implies A \setminus B = \{ 0 \} \implies |A| \neq |A \setminus B|$

---

(b) Since $A$ is countable then $C = A \setminus B$ would be uncountable too. Otherwise it would be either countable or finite and in this case $C \cup B$ would be countable.

Since $C$ is infinite, according to Theorem 4 $|C| = |C \cup B|$ on the other hand $|C \cup B| = |A|$ which yields the required proof. $\blacksquare$

## 37

Prove that a set is infinite if it is equinumerous to its subset which is not equal to the given set (Dedekind's definition of infinite sets).

---

Assume $A = B \cup C \land B \cap C = \emptyset \land B \neq \emptyset \land C \neq \emptyset \land A \sim B$ - here $\sim$ means equinumerous relationship.

Assume $A$ is finite, then $A \sim B \implies |A| = |B| \implies |C| = |A| - |B| = 0$ but from the above $C \neq \emptyset \implies |C| > 0$ hence the contradiction therefore $A$ can't be finite. $\blacksquare$

## 38

Build a bijection between a set comprised of union of intervals $[0, 1] \cup [2, 3] \cup [4, 5] \cup ...$ and an interval $[0, 1]$.

---

Let's build a bijection for a set $M_1=[0, 1] \cup [2, 3] \cup [4, 5] \cup ...=\cup_{n \in \N}[2n, 2n + 1]$ and a set of non-negative real numbers $\R^{+}_{0}$ as follows:

$$
f : M_1 \rightarrow \R^{+}_{0}, f(x | x \in M_1) = \lfloor{x+1}\rfloor + 2(x - \lfloor{x}\rfloor)
$$

where $\lfloor{x}\rfloor, x \in \R$ denotes largest integer number less than or equal to $x$, and

$$
f^{-1} : \R^{+}_{0} \rightarrow M_1, f^{-1}(x | x \in \R^{+}_{0}) = z + \frac{(x - z)}{2} \text{, where $z = 2\lfloor{\frac{x}{2}}\rfloor$.}
$$

Let's build a bijection for a set $M_2=[0,1]$ and $\R^{+}_{0}$ as follows:

$$
g : M_2 \rightarrow \R^{+}_{0}, g(x | x \in M_2) = \begin{cases}
  x, & \text{if $x=0$.}\\
  \frac{1}{x}, & \text{if $x \in \{ \frac{1}{n} | n \in \N^+ \}$.}\\
  \frac{1}{x}-1, & \text{otherwise}.
\end{cases}
$$

and

$$
g^{-1} : \R^{+}_{0} \rightarrow M_1, g^{-1}(x | x \in R^{+}_{0}) = \begin{cases}
  x, & \text{if $x=0$.}\\
  \frac{1}{x}, & \text{if $x \in \N^+$.}\\
  \frac{1}{x+1}, & \text{otherwise}.
\end{cases}
$$

Using definitions above we can build a bijection between $M_1, M_2$ using a composition of the above bijections:

$$h : M_1 \rightarrow M_2, h(x) = g^{-1}(f(x))$$

and

$$h^{-1} : M_2 \rightarrow M_1, h^{-1}(x) = f^{-1}(g(x))$$

## 39

Prove that a set of all lines on a Cartesian plane is equinumerous to a set of all dots on the same plane.

---

Each dot on a Cartesian plane could be uniquely defined by two coordinates hence a set of all dots is equinumerous to $R^2$. Each line on the plane could be uniquely defined by an equation $ax + by = 1$ therefore is also equinumerous to $R^2$.

## 40

Prove that a half-plane (all dots on a certain plane lying on the same side of a certain line) is equinumerous to a plane.

---

A proof for the above is equivalent to proving $\R \times \R^+ \sim \R \times \R$ which in its turn is equivalent to proving $\R^+ \sim \R$ and the latter could be proven by showing an existence of bijection, e.g.:

$$f : \R^+ \rightarrow \R, f(x) = \ln x$$
and
$$f^{-1} : \R \rightarrow \R^+, f^{-1}(x) = e^x$$

## Theorem 4

An interval $[0, 1]$ is equinumerous to a set of all infinite sequences of $0, 1$.

---

Proof: each number in $[0,1]$ using a sequence of $0, 1$ using base-2 notation. On the opposite, each number $0.\{k_i\}, k_i \in \{0,1\}$ has a corresponding number in $[0,1)$, taking a fraction part alone we could thus establish a bijection between all infinite sequences of $0,1$ and $[0,1)$ which in its turn has a bijection to $[0,1]$ from which follows original assertion. $\blacksquare$

## 41

Find a base-2 representation of $1/3$.

---

Since $\sum_{n \in \N}{\frac{1}{2^{2n}}} = \frac{4}{3} = 1 + \frac{1}{3}$ the base-2 representation of $1/3$ would be equal to $0.(01)$.

## Theorem 5

A square (its inside included) is equinumerous to a line segment.

---

$\triangleleft$

A square is equinumerous to $[0,1] \times [0,1]$.
According to theorem 4, an interval is equinumerous to infinite sequences $S$ of $0, 1$ therefore proving that $S \times S$ is equinumeours to $S$ would prove the original assertion.

Note, that for an element $u \in S \times S : u = \langle x_0 x_1 x_2 ..., y_0, y_1, y_2,... \rangle$ there could be a uniquely associated element of $v \in S : v = \langle x_0 y_0 x_1 y_1 x_2 y_2 ... \rangle$ and vice versa.

$\triangleright$

## 42

Prove an equinumerosity of $\R$ to a set of all finite sequences comprised of $r | r \in \R$.

---

As per theorem 4, $\R$ is equinumerous to a set $U$ of infinite sequences comprised of $0$ and $1$.

Therefore a target equinumerosity proof would follow from the existence of bijection between $U$ to a set $S$ of all finite sequence comprised of $r | r \in U$ and the latter could be build as follows:

* From $S$ to $U$: a set of sequences $\{ \langle x_{0,0} x_{1,0} ... \rangle, \langle x_{0,n} x_{1,n} ... \rangle \}$ could be encoded into a single sequence of $0, 1$ so that the number representing a total number of given sequences $n$ is encoded first using a prefix encoding (so that there is no ambiguity in decoding it from all possible sequences of $0, 1$) followed by a mix of elements from each sequences similar to how it is done in Theorem 5: $\langle \text{...prefix...} x_{0,0}x_{0,1}...x_{0,n}x_{1,0}x_{1,1}...x_{1,n}x_{2,0}x_{2,1}...x_{2,n}... \rangle$
* From $U$ to $S$: conversely a sequence comprised of $0, 1$ could be interpreted as a concatenation of a number of sequences that could be uniquely obtained using prefix encoding and then depending on that number elements for each sequence at the corresponding positions. $\blacksquare$

The simplest way of implementing unambiguous prefix encoding (in a sense not allowing two different sequences to correspond to the same number, e.g. `01` being the same as `1`) would be as follows: use `1` to designate `+1`, starting with a zero. A `0` would represent end of number in a sequence. So, encoded number would be equal to a sum of `1`-s, e.g. a sequence `0` would correspond to a number `0`, a sequence `10` - to a number `1`, `110` -> `2`, `1110` -> `3`, `11110` would mean `4` etc.

## 43

Prove an equinumerosity of $\R$ to a set of all infinite sequences comprised of $r | r \in \R$.

---

Also as per the same Theorem 4 there exist a bijection between a rational number and a set of sequences $P$ comprised of $e | e \in \{ 0, 1 \}$.

An infinite sequence comprised of $r | r \in \R$ is therefore equivalent to an infinite sequence comprised of elements where each element is itself an infinite sequence of $e | e \in \{ 0, 1 \}$. Let's denote a set of infinite sequences of $e | e \in \{ 0, 1 \}$ as $S$.

So to prove an equinumerosity of $\R$ to a set of all infinite sequences comprised of $r | r \in \R$ it should suffice to prove an existence of a bijection between $S$ and $P$.

A certain sequence in $S$ could be represented as follows:

$$
\langle x_{1,1}, x_{2,1}, x_{3,1}, x_{4,1}, ... \rangle\newline
\langle x_{1,2}, x_{2,2}, x_{3,2}, x_{4,2}, ... \rangle\newline
\langle x_{1,3}, x_{2,3}, x_{3,3}, x_{4,3}, ... \rangle\newline
\langle x_{1,4}, x_{2,4}, x_{3,4}, x_{4,4}, ... \rangle
$$

Let's denote a certain element in $P$ as:

$$
\langle y_{1}, y_{2}, y_{3}, y_{4}, y_{5}, y_{6}, y_{7}, ... \rangle
$$

A bijection between certain elements of $S, P$ could be build as follows: starting with $x_{1,1}$ we take consecutive elements, so that $y_{k} = x_{i, j}$ for all $i + j = m$ starting with $i = 1$ (consecuitve map elements in $S$ by "diagonals"), e.g.:

$$
y_{1} = x_{1,1}\newline
y_{2} = x_{1,2}, y_{3} = x_{2,1}\newline
y_{4} = x_{1,3}, y_{5} = x_{2,2}, y_{6} = x_{3,1}\newline
y_{7} = x_{1,4}, y_{8} = x_{2,3}, y_{9} = x_{3,2}, y_{10} = x_{4,1}\newline
...
$$

It is easy to see how to build reverse conversion from $y_i$ to a certain $x_{j, k}$ and the fact that such conversion is unique.

From the existence of bijection between $S, P$ follows the target equinumerosity proof. $\blacksquare$
