# 1.5. Cantor–Bernstein Theorem

## 44

Someone offered this definition: a set $A$ has strictly smaller cardinality than set $B$ if it is equinumerous to a subset of $B$ not matching entire $B$. Why this definition is incorrect?

---

Example: a set $M$ comprised of squares of all natural numbers is equinumerous to all natural numbers $\N$, yet $M$ is a subset of $\N$ not matching $\N$.

## Cardinality Relations

* If $A$ and $B$ are equinumerous $\implies$ $|A|$ is not greater than $|B|$.
* $|A| \le |B| \land |B| \le |C| \implies |A| \le |C|$.
* $|A| \le |B| \land |B| \le |A| \implies |A| = |B|$.
* $\forall A, B : |A| \le |B| \lor |B| \le |A|$ (a proof of this fact requires a use of [transfinite induction](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transfinite_induction)).

## Theorem 6 (Cantor-Bernstein theorem)

If $A$ is equinumerous to a subset of $B$ and $B$ is equinumerous to a subset of $A$ then $A$ is equinumerous to $B$.

---

$\triangleleft$

Assume $A \sim B_1 \land B_1 \subset B \land B \sim A_1 \land A_1 \subset A$. By theorem assuming existence of a bijection between $B, A_1 \implies$ an existence of a set $A_2 : A_2 \subset A_1$. From the above follows $A \sim B_1 \sim A_2$ and a theorem follows from a proof that $B \sim A\sim B_1 \sim A_2 \sim A_1$.

So given the above it should suffice to prove the following:

$$\forall A_0, A_1, A_2 : A_2 \subset A_1 \subset A_0 \land A_2 \sim A_0 \implies A_0 \sim A_1 \sim A_2$$

Assume $f$ is a bijection $A_0 \rightarrow A_2$. Existence of this bijection is obvious from the definition above and from its existence follows existence of another bijection $f' : A_1 \rightarrow A_3, A_3 \subset A_2$. Similarly the latter implies existence of $A_4 : A_4 \subset A_3$ and existence of a bijection $f'' : A_2 \rightarrow A_4$.

Expansion of the above yields:

$$... \subset A_4 \subset A_3 \subset A_2 \subset A_1 \subset A_0$$

as well as the existence of a bijection $f_i(A_i) = A_{i+2}$. Formally we can write $A_{2n}$ as a set of elements that could be obtained by applying $n$ times a function $f$ to elements of $A_0$.

The above could be reformulated as follows: a set $A_0$ is divided into non-intersecting sets $C_i = A_i \setminus A_{i+1}$ and a set $C = \cap_{i} A_i$. Also note, that $|C_0| = |C_2| = |C_4| = ....$ as function $f$ is a bijection between $C_0$ and $C_2$, $C_2$ and $C_4$ etc.:

$$C_0 \xrightarrow{f} C_2 \xrightarrow{f} C_4 \xrightarrow{f} ...$$

and same could be established for sets with odd indices:

$$C_1 \xrightarrow{f} C_3 \xrightarrow{f} C_5 \xrightarrow{f} ...$$

Then a bijection $g : A_0 \rightarrow A_1$ could be built as follows: let $x \in A_0$, then $g(x) = f(x)$ if $x \in C_{2k}$ and $g(x) = x$ if $x \in C_{2k+1} \lor x \in C$.

$\triangleright$

## 45

Show that exercises 29-43 asking to prove equinumerosity could be easily proven by using Cantor-Bernstein theorem.

---

## 46

Prove that all geometric figures containing a line or a curve segment are equinumerous.

---

1. A line or a curve is equinumerous to a segment $[0, a]$ - taking one end as `0` and then building a bijection for every dot on that line or curve as a distance on that line/curve from that end we end up with an interval $[0, a]$ which in its turn is equinumerous to $[0, 1]$. Note, that $[0, 1]$ segment is equinumerous to $\R$.
2. A plane is equinumerous to $\R \times \R$. So for every figure $F$ on a plane $F \sim \R \times \R$ should always be true.
3. A figure $F$ containing a line or a curve $S$ therefore has the following relationship: $S \subset F \land F \subset \R \times \R \land S \sim \R$.
4. From $\R \sim \R \times \R$ follows that $S \sim F$. $\blacksquare$

## 47

A square $S$ is divided into two non-intersecting parts $A, B$. Prove $A \sim S \lor B \sim S$.

---

Proof for the above follows from `#48`.

## 48

A line segment is broken into two parts. Prove that either part is equinumerous to a line segment.

---

Assume a line segment $S : S = A + B$, where $A, B$ are parts that $S$ is broken into.

Lemma: prove that either $A$ or $B$ contains a line segment, i.e. an interval equinumerous to a certain range $[a, a + \epsilon], \epsilon > 0$.

Proof by contradiction: Assume that such interval doesn't exist. Let's start with the leftmost point $p$ that belongs to a line segment. By definition it should belong to either $A$ or $B$, without loss of generality assume that it is $A$. If $\exist \epsilon : \epsilon > 0$, so that any point on the segment from this point forward belongs to $A$ then contradiction has been found. Otherwise point that we started with is the only point that belongs to an interval $A$ and the next point belongs to an interval $B$. Next, start with the first point after $p$, $p' \in B$ and repeat reasoning above until we get three neighbor points: $p \in A, p' \in B, p'' \in A$, however it means that on a continuous interval $[p, p''], p < p'', p \in \R, p'' \in \R$ there is only one point $p' : p < p' < p'', p' \in \R$ which can't happen because there is an infinite amount of dots $q \in [p, p''], p, q, p'' \in \R$ from which follows the proof of lemma.

Each line segment is equinumerous to $\R$ and from the above lemma follows that either $A$ or $B$ is equinumerous to a certain interval $[a, b], a \in \R \land b \in \R$ which in its turn is equinumerous to $\R$ from which follows the desired proof.


## 49. Alternative Proof of Cantor-Bernstein Theorem

Restatement of the theorem is equivalent to proving the following:

$$\forall A_0, A_1, A_2 : A_2 \subset A_1 \subset A_0 \land A_0 \sim A_2 \implies A_0 \sim A_1 \sim A_2$$

---

Assume $f : A_0 \rightarrow A_2$ is a bijection between $A_0$ and $A_2$.

Let's call a set $X$ as "good" if $(A_0 \setminus A_1) + f(X) \subset X \land X \subset A$.

It is easy to see that intersection of any number of "good" sets yields a "good" set.
Assume $M$ is an intersection of all "good" sets. Since it is a good set and since $M$ is a "minimal" set:

$$
(A_0 \setminus A_1) + f(M) = M
$$

A bijection $g : A_0 \rightarrow A_1$ could be build so that it matches with $f$ for $x | x \in M$ and reduces to equivalence outside $M$:

$$
g : A_0 \rightarrow A_1, g(x) = \begin{cases}
  f(x), & \text{if $x \in M$.}\\
  x, & \text{otherwise.}\\
\end{cases}
$$

> **Note:** the proof above is incomplete.

---

Alternative proof:

1. Assume $f : A_0 \rightarrow A_2$ is a bijection between $A_0$ and $A_2$.
3. From existence of $f$ follows existence of $A_3 \subset A_2$ and a bijection $u : A_2 \rightarrow A_3$ where A_2 is seen as a set of elements in $A_0$ and $u \in f$
4. A bijection between $g : A_0 \rightarrow A_1$ is then built so that: $g(x) = x : x | x \in (A_1 \setminus A_2)$

> **Note:** draft, TODO: complete
>
## 50

Assume a bijection $f : A \rightarrow B_1 \land B \subset A \land B_1 \subset B$ and a bijection $g : B \subset A_1 \land A_1 \subset A$.
Prove existence of sets $A', A'', B', B'' : A = A' + A'' \land B = B' + B''$ and there is a subset of $f$ which is a bijection between $A', B'$ and there is a subset of $g$ which is a bijection between $A'', B''$.

---

From existence of $f, g$ follows $A \sim B$ by Cantor-Bernstein theorem.

## 51

Prove that a square could be divided into two parts which could then be used to compose a circle.

---

TBD

## 52

Prove, that countable set has a smaller cardinality than any uncountable.

---

Assume $C$ is a countable set and $U$ is uncountable set.

1. $U$ cardinality can not be smaller or the same than $C$ otherwise it'd be either finite or countable.
2. The only other possibility is that $U$ is larger than $C$. However if $U \setminus C$ is finite or countable, then $U$ is countable, hence the set difference could only be uncountable. Here: we view $U$ as sharing the same elements. To generalize this to arbitrary countable set $C'$, we can establish a bijection $f : C \rightarrow C', C \subset U$ and existence of such bijection follows from the existence of a bijection of a set of a natural numbers to any countable set.

## 53

Prove, that for any sets $A, B, C: |A| < |B| \land |B| < |C| \implies |A| < |C|$.

## 57

Assume a set $S$ is a plane without arbitrary countable set of points. Prove, that any two points in $S$ is linearly connected and could be connected using two line segments both of which belong to $S$ (more formally, each dot on such a segment belongs to $S$).

---

Assume $a, b$ are two points on $S$. Let's pick a certain radius $r$ greater than zero and less than a distance between $a, b$.

Lemma: prove that there are infinitely many line segments of length $r$ starting in $a$ that belong to $S$.

Proof by contradiction:

1. Assume a coordinate axis in $a$, each line segment could be uniquely associated with an angle $\alpha : \alpha \in [0, 2 \pi)$.
2. Thus, a set of line segments is equinumerous to $\R$.
3. At the same time by assuming the opposite each line segment must be associated with a point from a countable set of points. Which means that assumption implies equinumerosity of a subset of a countable set to $\R$ which is false from which follows lemma statement.

From the lemma above follows existence of infinitely many pairs of line segments connecting $a, b$.
Similarly, having infinite number of line segment pairs which can be uniquely associated with a certain angle $\beta : [0, 2 \pi)$ the same approach could be used to prove existence of two line segments.

## 58

Given any set $S : |S| = n$ prove, that a number of subsets ($2^n$) is strictly greater than $n$.

---

A number of all subsets in a set of cardinality $n$ is $2^n$, so a proof is obvious for $n = 0$ and taking induction step for next value of $n$ the number of subset doubles from which follows the statement of the theorem.
